Tito Ortiz will not be punished for holding onto Chael Sonnen choke when fight was stopped
Default author imageCoral Barry for Metro.co.ukTuesday 24 Jan 2017 4:38 pm
32
Ortiz told if he will face punishment for refusing to let go of choke on Sonnen
John McCarthy checks on Chael Sonnen after the stoppage (Picture: Getty)
Tito Ortiz will not be reprimanded for refusing to release Chael Sonnen from a choke at the end of a fight because the referee did not complain.


Nurmagomedov promises he will break Ferguson's arm if he gets the chance
Andy Foster, executive director of the California State Athletic Commission, confirmed on Monday that Ortiz would not be punished for refusing to released Sonnen from a choke hold at Bellator 170.

Ortiz forced Sonnen to tap in the first round and referee John McCarthy needed to push him off when he initially ignored the stoppage.

But CSAC will not be looking into the incident as McCarthy did not report the infringement.

‘We are not looking to,’ Foster told MMA Fighting.

INGLEWOOD, CA - JANUARY 21: Tito Ortiz stands with his son Jacob in the cage after defeating Chael Sonnen ((not pictured) in round one of their Bellator MMA light heavyweight fight at The Forum on January 21, 2017 in Inglewood, California. (Photo by Jayne Kamin-Oncea/Getty Images)
Ortiz bowed out of MMA victorious (Picture: Getty)
‘Referee John McCarthy fixed that situation quickly.

‘John got him to to release the choke.

‘If a referee wants a fighter punished for conduct, they will come and we will discuss it.

INGLEWOOD, CA - JANUARY 21: Chael Sonnen is is checked before he enters the cage for his Bellator MMA light heavyweight fight against Tito Ortiz (not pictured) at The Forum on January 21, 2017 in Inglewood, California. (Photo by Jayne Kamin-Oncea/Getty Images)
Sonnen’s debut in Bellator did not last long (Picture: Getty)
MORE: UFC


Brock Lesnar will probably return to UFC because the sport isn't clean, says Don Frye

UFC London 2017 tickets, prices and fight card - all the information

Fighter In Focus: The UFC's hottest heavyweight prospect is Francis Ngannou
‘That did not happen.’

Ortiz freely admitted after the fight he deliberately held onto the choke, but was quick to apologise to CSAC.

The 42-year-old’s victory at Bellator is his last appearance in MMA as he retires from an impressive career in the cage.