BlackRock warns CEOs against buybacks that only provide fleeting gains
Published: Jan 24, 2017 12:20 p.m. ET

     4  
Infrastructure spending welcome but not a panacea: Fink
AFP/Getty Images
BlackRock Chairman and CEO Laurence Fink

By
WILLIAM
WATTS
DEPUTY MARKETS EDITOR
   
BlackRock chief executive Larry Fink put S&P 500 bosses on notice Tuesday. Fink, who heads up the world’s largest asset manager, said his company won’t take kindly to share buyback proposals aimed solely at providing a near-term boost to prices.

In his most recent annual letter to chief executives of S&P 500 index SPX, +0.66%  companies, Fink said firms should take advantage of tax proposals—including incentives to repatriate cash held overseas—expected to be put forward by President Donald Trump’s administration. But he warned that the asset manager, which boasts $5.1 trillion in assets, would be scrutinizing how firms deploy repatriated cash.

“Will it be used simply for more share buybacks? Or is it a part of a capital plan that appropriately balances returning capital to shareholders with prudently investing for future growth?” Fink asked.

The BlackRock chief said that while companies have started to pay more attention to concerns about “long-term sustainability,” they have continued to engage in buybacks “at a furious pace.” He elaborated:

In fact, for the 12 months ending in the third quarter of 2016, the value of dividends and buybacks by S&P 500 companies exceeded those companies’ operating profit. While we certainly support returning excess capital to shareholders, we believe companies must balance those practices with investment in future growth. Companies should engage in buybacks only when they are confident that the return on those buybacks will ultimately exceed the cost of capital and the long-term returns of investing in future growth.
See: Share buybacks will rise 30% to $780 billion in 2017: Goldman Sachs

Fink said anticipated tax-reform efforts should seize the opportunity to build a capital gains regime that “truly rewards long-term investments over short-term holdings.” He said that a one year is “far too short” to be considered a long-term holding period and that, instead, gains should receive long-term treatment only after three years, with a decreasing tax rate for each additional year of ownership.

Meanwhile, the Trump administration’s push for increased infrastructure investment can help slow the flow of job losses due to automation, it isn’t a solution to the problem, he said.

That means the largest U.S. companies need to improve their capacity for training and educating employees. He also called on companies to develop a more secure retirement, including the millions of workers at smaller companies who aren’t covered by employer-sponsored plans.

Fink said BlackRock doesn’t aim to micromanage a company’s operations but is focused on ensuring boards are held accountable for creating long-term value. He explained that there will be consequences for companies that fail to demonstrate a long-term vision:

However, a long-term approach should not be confused with an infinitely patient one. When BlackRock does not see progress despite ongoing engagement, or companies are insufficiently responsive to our efforts to protect our clients’ long-term economic interests, we do not hesitate to exercise our right to vote against incumbent directors or misaligned executive compensation.
More from MarketWatc