Trump takes over stable but sluggish economy, but deficit growth is on the horizon, CBO says
By Kelsey Snell January 24 at 11:51 AM 
 
In this 2014 file photo, copies of then President Barack Obama’s proposed fiscal 2015 budget are set out for distribution. (AP Photo/J. Scott Applewhite, File)
President Trump will start his term at the helm of a relatively stable economy but an increasingly ominous explosion in debt and deficit is looming in the very near future, according to a new report from the Congressional Budget Office.

In the short-term, CBO is now projecting deficits will be $28 billion lower for 2017 than the previous year. They now predict a 2017 deficit of $559  billion, down from $587 billion posted in 2016. The spending growth rate is set to outpace the rate of revenue growth after 2019, causing the deficit to explode to $1.4 trillion by the end of the decade.

If current policies go unchanged the CBO estimates that public debt is expected to grow to the highest rates since period shortly after World War II, thanks in large part to Medicare and Social Security. The latest is that debt will rise to $15 trillion by the end of this year and tick up to $25 trillion in 2027. Such dramatic deficit estimates could put lawmakers in a the difficult position of either cutting spending or increasing revenue from taxes despite Trump’s promises not to cut major programs like Social Security and Medicare.

“The sort of change we’d need to really change our future, 20 to 30 years down the road, are pretty significant,” CBO director Keith Hall said on Tuesday. “We are starting from a very high level of debt.”

Republican leaders in Congress have vowed to cut spending but economists estimate that many of Trump’s policies, like deep cuts to tax rates and increased infrastructure spending, could continue to drive up the deficit.

“We have new leadership in the White House, and Republicans in Congress are preparing pro-growth legislation that will get our economy moving at full steam again and tackle our fiscal problems head on,” House Budget Committee Chairwoman Diane Black (R-Tenn.) said in a statement.

Trump has not provided much detail on any of his policy proposals but experts at the nonpartisan Tax Policy Center estimate that Trump’s tax proposals could add around $7 trillion to the deficit in a decade. A more-conservative estimate from the right-leaning Tax Foundation, concluded that same tax proposals would create a $4.4 trillion budget hole in the same timeframe.

Hill Republicans embrace building of border wall, despite cost

Recent Congressional legislation estimates the cost of a border wall at around $10 billion. Repealing the entire Affordable Care Act would increase deficits by $350 billion over a decade, according to a previous CBO report.

The Daily 202 newsletter
A must-read morning briefing for decision-makers.
Sign up
The new report also showed that the number of people without insurance has remained close to previous projections of around 27 million, even though fewer people are buying insurance on the exchanges.

Approximately 12 million people under 65 are expected to have insurance in any given month as the result of the ACA and around 9 million will receive subsides for coverage purchased through the marketplace, Hall said. A supplemental report said that the number of people insured on the marketplace is lower than previously expected because fewer employers are ending employee health benefits than the CBO previously expected.

The nonpartisan congressional scorekeepers expect that unemployment will fall from 4.7 to 4.4 percent by the end of 2018 and economic growth will remain modest.

Republican leaders in Congress have not yet weighed in on all of Trump’s proposals but many, including Black argue that their policies will lead to significant economic growth.

The cost of maintaining the projected debt levels is also expected to sky rocket. Interest payments on the debt are now are roughly equal to one-fifth of the total cost of all mandatory spending programs like Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid. Those payments are expected to be about half the size of those programs within 10 years, Hall said.